giving a death count in Gaza is a
contentious issue the Hamas run Health
Ministry in the territory has been
offering figures since the beginning of
the war and international organizations
including the United Nations as well as
media organizations often rely on them
as they are seen as the best available
but as the figures rise the task of
documenting the deaths is becoming more
difficult and more disputed our report
assesses the changing process of
counting the dead in this conflict
in the war in Gaza only one institution
has been providing a detailed death toll
the territory's health Ministry which is
overseen by Hamas the ministry collects
data from hospitals and regularly
updates a central list including not
only the name sex and age of the victim
but also their personal identification
number whenever possible multiple
independent Studies have shown this list
to be
trustworthy in January of this year even
Israeli intelligence confirmed that the
gazen health min count roughly match
their own estimates although they remain
skeptical of how many casualties are
combatants and how many civilians but
now as the war drags on Counting the
dead has become more difficult and has
led to renewed accusations from Israel
that the figures are
unreliable with more than three out of
four hospitals damaged or destroyed the
traditional system for establishing a
casualty list has all but collapsed more
and more Hamas authorities are using on
the ground media reports and eyewitness
testimony to count B IES over 30% of the
Health ministry's death doll now
consists of unidentified
individuals and yet even as Israeli
authorities draw attention to the
increasingly poor quality of data some
independent analysts say the Gaza death
toll could be vastly underestimated a
study published earlier in July in the
medical journal of the Lancet claimed
that at least
186,000 Palestinians had most likely
died as a result of the Israeli bombing
and ground offensive in
Gaza a clearer picture of the death and
destruction will likely emerge after the
fighting is over and a nonpartisan
investigation is allowed to take
place Michael spaget is a professor at
the Royal hallay University of London
and chair of every casualty counts an
NGO that is committed to ensure that
victims in armed conflicts are recorded
recognized and remembered welcome to DW
it's great to have you on the show now
Michael according to the latest figures
published last night by the Hamas ran
Ministry of Health and Gaza over 39
9,000 people have been killed since the
War Began 9 months ago how reliable is
this
number so I would say that that's a
plausible number but uh it consists as
your report said of of two components
and one component is actually much more
credible than the other component uh I
should say that just yesterday the
Ministry of Health released another
detailed list of victims that has 28,1
185 five on it and that comes from their
morg based monitoring system plus a form
that people can fill out reporting tests
that they know about so I I view that
28,1 185 as a highly credible Rock
Bottom minimum the other bit of it
essentially 10,000 additional deaths
that bring you up to the figure that you
just mentioned is really a black box and
they've never explained where that comes
from they say that it's based on
reliable media reports but they've never
actually published those those reports
or even a methodology for how they go
about compiling them yeah I I want to
talk about methodology because other
studies estimate that the number of
deaths in Gaza could be multiple times
higher than those 39,000 that we were
just talking about how do you explain
this this enormous
difference well really that um letter I
won't even call it a a study because
it's it's it's really really um more of
a joke than a study I mean that that
that letter is just not a serious piece
piece piece of work but they're they're
tapping into something that is real
which is that there are some deaths that
are not directly caused by the conflict
in a in a violent way so um so that's
that's true there are going to be some
deaths like that but the where that
number comes from is is is really just
not serious in in any way that they they
just took 13 other conflicts none of
which really resembles very closely the
Gaza conflict and then they used some
very poor measurements for indirect
deaths caused in those those conflicts
and then they said well if Gaza kind of
looks like what happened in those 13
very dissimilar conflicts then there
there there could be this huge number of
deaths it's just it's not serious and
people should just ignore it I've got a
whole article about this by the way yeah
that is some very very important context
you're giving us there I really
appreciate that um I'd like to focus for
a minute on the Israeli government's
perspective and Play a clip from prime
minister Netanyahu speaking yesterday at
the US Congress and then return to
you that's why despite all the lies
you've
heard the war in
Gaza has one of the lowest ratios of
combatants to non-combatants casualties
in the history of urban
Warfare and you want to know where it's
lowest in
Gaza it's
Rafa Michael is there any evidence
whatsoever for the claims being made
there by prime minister
Netanyahu no that's just ridiculous what
what what he's he's saying um he also
said apparently that um there there are
V virtually no civilian deaths uh in in
Rafa um I I can tell you based on the
the latest detailed list of deaths that
was released by the the the Ministry of
Health yes yesterday that since the Rafa
in uh um Invasion began there there were
recorded by the Ministry of Health which
as you pointed out has an imperfect
monitoring system right now but they
still manag to record about 3,500 new
deaths and of those
1,656 were children children under the
age of
15 so so it's it's not anywhere near as
as clean as as as he is trying to make
it out to be yeah and back in in May
Benjamin Netanyahu himself put the
number of deaths in the Gaza Strip at
30,000 saying back then that 14,000 of
them um were said to be combatant which
would leave 16,000 civilians but let's
look beyond the fighting that is
happening right now because once the the
guns fall silent what will have to be
done to establish the real picture and
for us to know the true toll of this
war this is going to be a major project
that is going to take probably a decade
or more to to complete uh we have an
excellent starting point fortunately
here which are those detailed lists that
the Ministry of Health has been
releasing those lists are imperfect they
have many flaws in them I've written a
series of articles that puts a lot of
effort into exposing flaws in in in
those lists but we must not lose sight
of the big picture that those lists are
really a gold mine of of information and
all subsequent work is going to build on
that but it's going to take a long time
it's going to be a major project uh but
I'm confident that this is something
that that is going to happen and I'm I'm
confident that eventually we're going to
have a very clear picture of the death
toll both civilian and non- civilian in
Gaza we talk a lot about numbers here
but your organization precisely strives
to recognize every death from armed
conflict as an individual human tragedy
how is that possible under the current
circumstances in
Gaza well you know the scale of it is is
so vast that uh you you know you can't
really give um every individual his or
her due I mean not not not even close
but but really I think the the place to
start is by listing each person killed
by name and then trying to say something
about each one of those in individuals
and when I refer to a project that will
happen when the fighting finally stops
that will take at least a decade this is
going to be a central part of it that we
we want to produce
as complete a list as possible of the
people who have been killed and then we
want to know something about each one
the circumstances of their deaths who
they were but but of course no human can
keep all that information uh in in their
their mind because it's so so large but
there have been a number of projects
that that attempt to do this and it's
it's an important undertaking and we
absolutely must do it for that was
Michael spaggot share of every casualty
counts thank you so much for your time
you're welcome please to be here